Hello everybody and welcome to this lecture on line tracing a.k.a. recasting and it's an incredibly
useful tool is used for all sorts of things in game development.
Whenever one objects interacts with another say a bullet being fired from a gun knowing whether it's
hit something a laser trip wire.
And of course what we are using it for is figuring out when we reach out do we come into contact with
something that we can pick up so that one of the ways of visualizing this is imagine we're shining a
virtual laser into the world just like our debug line is doing.
But unlike our debug line we will have the ability to interrogate what has actually been hit.
We'll have a look at the different view modes within the editor to visualize what we can interact with
and what we cannot and we will be simulating physics on objects that we want to lift.
And by doing that it will also set the objects channel.
And that's what the ray caster we used to focus on the things that we want to lift and ignore everything
else.
So let's dive over into unreal.
Okay.
So as you can see here we've turned on physics and I think it's zero g at the moment let's just start
playing again.
I've had lots of fun just running into the cone and seeing what it does.
Occasionally it doesn't quite work yet.
We haven't set it up to do so but there we go we've got it going we've managed to give it enough inertia
to go but we haven't set everything up yet for that to fully work.
Now obviously that now has dynamic shadows rather than what it had before.
But we've also got a couple of different view modes.
And by the end of this lecture we'll be able to visualize our world in different ways not just in the
standard that we used to so far.
And this is a view about collisions what the player can cannot collide with and how those collisions
would actually happen.
OK.
So if we eject ourselves when we're playing we can see that we've got the green line coming out so far.
Now I must impress upon you at this point that that isn't recasting.
That's just a debug line that cannot interact with anything in our world.
However when we recast we will be able to do that.
So what we need to think about is how we're actually going to line trace in our real world.
Now let's have a look at some of the different views that you can have.
This would give us a better understanding of how things are actually set up if we go to the area at
the top left of your viewport where it says lit.
If we click on that we've got a couple of options.
Note here we can get back to the lit with old and the number four.
That's quite useful to be able to hop back to that type of view.
Now there are two that we're going to have a look at here player collision and visibility collision.
Now on my particular computer I came across this bug.
I don't know if you want to call it that but when you select player collision it goes completely black
and the same with visibility collision which I know that reading on the forums some of you have also
had the same issue.
It's relatively straightforward to fix if it happens to be the same issue.
If you go to the show menu just to the right of that go all the way down to developer and turn on ray
tracing debug the moment we do that we get our lovely colors that we want.
So anything in this view that has a light sign that's a static mesh.
We've got our movable doors here.
They are also static meshes but they are in fact movable and we can collide with it.
We've got on collision volume over here that's a one type of green and in a moment we'll see a another
type of green.
Now say we were picking up this cone and placing it into our collision volume.
Well at the moment if we select it we see that it is in fact a static mesh if we go to the details it
is static is set.
So but if we select some of the other options like stationary or movable we see that it will change
its color accordingly and you'll see in a moment it will change its color to another type of green very
similar to this one but slightly bluer in its hue.
And one of the great things about this view is that if our doors didn't have a collider on them we'd
be able to see that because we would just be able to see straight through outside into our world.
However these doors do have colliders on because we made sure that it does now.
We don't have that much complex geometry in our scene but there is a difference between player collision
and visibility collision.
You can see here there's a lot more detail when it comes to the visibility collision than there is when
it comes to the player collision.
Now one of the main differences between having this visibility collision and the player collision is
much more simple version is that we can choose when recasting into our world which one of those we actually
use.
So for this particular instance say we did have something our side of the door turned up the visibility
collision back on and our player was supposed to reach it.
If we hadn't set up the right casting properly we would find that you wouldn't be able to actually pass
through the door and be able to reach through it at all.
And what we will end up saying when it comes to the cone over here is that our debug line if that intersects
with any part of this collision if they occupy the same space that would pretty much be classed as grabbing
it so just to summarize.
This is a great view of how the world is interacting how the line traces will her work how physics will
work within the game itself as well and we'll help you debug things as if you've forgotten to add a
colliders to something for instance.
So the great thing about this view is it enables us to view the world how the ray caster or how the
physics engine is going to see it.
Okay.
So if we go over into the modes and go and pick one of these other default objects that we can bring
in let's just bring a cylinder in and now you'll notice as we put it in the world obviously it snapped
in half way.
But if we try and move it it'll whilst the game is playing it's not going to let us do that.
So let's stop.
All the changes that we've made.
You've got to watch out for that.
They've gone so let's drag that cube in.
Lift it up ever so slightly.
Now look at its color now we already experience with the cone a few moments ago that we could change
it to stationary or even movable and we can change its color because it now acts differently.
However there is another way of doing it in one click.
Let's say this cube here we wanted it to respond to physics.
We scroll down.
We've got this tick box here simulate physics.
And notice that it's a very similar green but not quite as the collision volume itself.
It's nice that there are similar colors that you know that these two things can probably interact.
I wouldn't say that's true of every color though right now at the moment.
We've done that what we can do is simulate it's mass.
Now this is great because it means we can give our player a mass let's say 60 kilos and we can give
both of these objects.
If we wanted to move them both into this collision volume for instance that means that let's say we
set both of them at 40 which means that a single one won't open the door but two of the objects will
because we're heavier than those two things combined.
So we can change the mass here and let's say it's a 10 kilos for the vote.
Now when we press play we can't quite interact with it as has well as we want to at the moment but we
can push things around.
If they were light enough.
That's not how we want to do it we want to be able to just pick it up and then move it across probably
with the E key or something like that and we'll talk about key binding in an upcoming lecture.
Now we're just going to come out to play for a moment now.
The moment that we set the simulate physics if we scroll back up it automatically becomes movable at
the same time.
You can't have something being simulated in physics and not be movable it's just not possible.
And also if we scroll down and go to the collisions section we've got a collision presets here we drop
that area down and we can see here the object type says physics body.
Now I've seen a bug in the past where that hasn't updated so you might have to click off and back on
again to see that changed.
But we've got an object type here that is physics body okay.
So there are two types of filtering that we can do.
One is filtering by the type of line trace that we're doing.
And one is by the object type itself.
So we can say which type of objects we can pick up because of a certain object type.
So if we make sure that only the physics body ones are the ones we're able to pick up we can set up
our scene in such a way that the player will know what they can interact with.
So if we have a look at some of the other objects in our scene if we click on the door that's a world
dynamic.
If we click on this floating sphere oh we need to scroll up or down to see where that is.
That doesn't have anything on the collision.
It's also we're not going to interact with that we select the cone just behind again that is a world
dynamic.
And the cube these physics bodies are the ones that we'll be able to filter with and say those are the
object types we can pick up so if we're going to use this cube and the cone behind we can see here visually
that the cone isn't set up right.
We click on it.
We can scroll up slightly to hell.
I thought we were going to scroll down and simulate physics and obviously give it a mass.
And again I don't really care what the masses at the moment but we can set it to something like 10 or
even just 1.
Now earlier on when you saw it flying around the level that was just me having a bit of fun I turned
off enable gravity and then of course you can run into things.
And if it responds to us which sometimes it doesn't.
But never mind it will end up floating slowly around the room.
Did I actually set it right.
Yes.
Well it looks like it should start flying around the room and it is also set to movable.
And don't forget that we've added something into our scene and we've changed the mobility of our cone
so our lighting will have to be rebuilt as well.
So I'm going to go ahead and do that now.
There we go.
That's all done.
And I'm just going to try once more to interact with Okay so we can interact with the cube.
That seems to work well.
Can we interact with this and get it flying around the room.
Yes we can.
OK.
So I had lots of fun with that earlier.
If you could make it zero g couldn't you.
I'll be very interesting.
Of course one of the things we haven't discussed yet is you can also put limits to the player how heavy
a thing you can pick up.
So this box is quite large.
Perhaps if we set a limit to the player here they can only pick up something that's 20 or 30 kilos and
this one's 50 even though it's a physics object in the world that may be able to be knocked over or
blown around by some other forces the player won't be able to interact because they might have a maximum
amount they can pick up.
Now if we go back to the collision area here now the physics body is just one of many object types.
If we go to our project settings and go to collision if we go to the dropdown here we get a list.
It's not exhaustive.
Not all of them are available within this list but this gives you a little bit of an idea of the type
of collisions that we can have in fact we've got physics body just there for instance.
So this is really useful information but also on more complex games which are certainly isn't.
But you can add new object channels so if you wanted certain things interacting with other things then
you could do that by adding specialized object channels but that's a bit too advanced for what we're
doing in high level.
OK.
So that's about as wrapped up.
But there's one thing I want to do and that's go back to my cone and turn gravity back on and let's
set that back at 10 kilos for the moment.
If I didn't do that I'd forget and I'd be wondering later on why a cone floating around my seat.
Okay.
That's it for this lecture and I'll see you all in the next one.